From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the daily.
[Music]
One by one over the past few weeks,
three boats in the Caribbean Sea have
been blown up by the US military,
killing all 17 people aboard.
Each time, President Trump has claimed
that the boats were carrying drugs to
the US and that those killed were narco
terrorists.
But he's offered no concrete evidence to
back up that claim.
Today, my colleague Charlie Savage on
what he's learned about what may be the
true objective behind these air strikes
and whether any of this is even legal.
[Music]
It's Thursday, September 25th.
Charlie, it's great to have you.
>> Thanks for having me on.
>> We've come to you to talk about what's
been happening off the coast of
Venezuela over the past month. We've now
seen three separate US military strikes
on boats that American officials say
were carrying drugs. And those strikes
have come after Trump has been building
up a military presence in the Caribbean
Sea for weeks now. You cover national
security. So, help us understand what's
going on here.
President Trump and the Defense
Secretary Pete Hexath have ordered
military special operations forces in
the Caribbean to attack boats in
international waters, at least for now,
that are suspected of smuggling drugs
for certain cartels and gangs that Trump
has controversially designated as
terrorist organizations. And this is a
fundamental shift in how the United
States has been dealing for years and
years with the problem of drug smuggling
coming out of Latin America across the
water towards the United States in a
really dramatic and legally disputed
shift. The United States is claiming a
right to summarily kill everyone on a
boat it suspects of drug running in
international waters to essentially
treat the issue of drug smuggling as if
it's an armed attack on the United
States and to kill people suspected of
participating in that activity as if
they were combatants on a battlefield in
a war. Safe to say these are
extraordinary and unprecedented moves.
>> Absolutely. There's been pushing and
tugging on the laws around armed
conflict and the use of force in the
21st century because of the war on
terrorism and the notion of a war
against a non-state actor like al Qaeda.
But this is fundamentally different than
that. This is treating people who are
civilians, even if they are suspected of
being criminals, as if they were
combatants, and killing them without any
kind of due process.
>> Okay, so take me to the beginning of
this story. Where does all this start?
Well, for me and my colleagues like
Colleen Cooper and Eric Schmidt who
cover the Pentagon and Julian Barnes,
also who covers intelligence, we've all
been working on this a lot together. It
starts in August when we picked up
chatter and were able to confirm that
Trump had secretly signed an order in
late July directing the military to use
military force, that is to target with
lethal force suspected drug smugglers
from groups that his administration had
designated as terrorists. Normally when
Trump does something like that, he touts
it. He puts it up on the internet. He
signs it with a flourish in front of
cameras. It was very unusual that this
was happening without any publicity. And
so throughout August, we were watching
as number one, an enormous amount of
naval firepower was moved into the South
Caribbean Sea. And as the Trump
administration ratcheted up its
rhetorical attacks on Venezuela's
government, its strongman president
Nicholas Maduro, they kept calling him a
cartel leader, illegitimate, etc.
suggesting the focus was going to be
Venezuelan.
And indeed, on September 2nd, Trump is
talking to some reporters in the Oval
Office when he suddenly says,
>> "We just uh over the last few minutes
literally shot out a
a boat, a drug carrying boat, a lot of
drugs in that boat." that just that same
day the United States had conducted a
military strike on a boat
>> came out of Venezuela and coming out
very heavily from Venezuela. A lot of
things are coming out of Venezuela. So,
>> and that we would be hearing more about
that.
[Music]
And soon after on his social media
platform, he posted a description of
this strike. He said he'd killed 11
people who were aboard the vessel, which
he said was smuggling drugs on behalf of
the Trenda Araua, Venezuelan gang, which
he had designated as terrorists. And
there was a video from different views
of aerial surveillance showing a boat on
water, not clear exactly who or what is
on board, and then it explodes.
And the scale of the death, 11 people,
was also very striking because a boat
that is smuggling cargo, one of these
sort of go fast boats, does not need a
crew of 11. That just takes up space.
You could put more drugs on the boat if
that's indeed what was happening. And so
it also immediately raised questions
about who was actually on this boat, how
good the intelligence was. Was there
some human trafficking going on too?
Some migrants or something on the boat
who had nothing to do with drugs and
were also now killed. But it was clear
at that point that this secret order we
had written about and this buildup of
forces in the Caribbean Sea had now been
used for the first time.
Charlie, it sounds like one, this was a
remarkable moment, and two, that you
were actually skeptical that this was
even a drug boat. It wasn't clear based
on the evidence.
>> Well, there was no evidence. There was
just an assertion and then there was
this oddity of why are there so many
people on this boat? And there was an
immediately a reaction among experts in
the law of armed conflict. Retired
senior judge advocate general officers
who used to be in charge of telling the
military where the limits lay and what
was permissible in terms of using force.
And a hallmark of the entire ethos is
you do not deliberately target
civilians, even criminal suspects,
unless they are directly participating
in hostilities. And the Trump
administration has not put out a
detailed legal rationale for how this
isn't just murder. They've gestured at
the outlines of a rationale.
>> What have they said exactly, Charlie,
about the rationale behind this?
They have said that at a time in which a
100,000 Americans a year die from drug
overdoses, Trump has the authority to
lawfully decide that the criminal
problem of drug smuggling and drug
trafficking is essentially an armed
attack on the United States. that the
United States can use military force in
self-defense
against drug trafficking and that
therefore he has constitutional
authority to kill these people.
>> The argument is that these drug
trafficking groups are threatening
Americans are killing Americans with the
drugs that they smuggle into the United
States and that that is enough to
declare them terrorists. At this point,
all we have is for the first attack,
especially in September 2nd, is
President Trump's assertion that the
intelligence was confident that this
boat was carrying drugs that would
eventually be bound for the United
States. Further complicating that is
just because if there are drugs on a
boat, just because they're leaving one
country down there doesn't necessarily
mean they're bound for here. It it
looked like it was going to Trindad and
Tobago from Venezuela. And that's often
a trans shshipment point to Europe. In
any case, all we have is Trump saying,
"We have recordings. We know what was on
the boat.
>> Take our word for it." Basically,
>> take our word for it. And then it turns
out that the video he released, which
shows a boat moving in the water and
then blown apart, is not the whole story
because it was edited. And the people
who had been briefed on the unedited
video say that number one the boat had
turned around before the United States
military attacked it. It had apparently
seen an aircraft kind of stalking it and
gotten freaked out whoever was piloting
the boat and turned around and was
pointed back towards Venezuela.
and two that it it didn't just take one
strike to settle the matter. Even after
the first strike disabled the boat, they
struck it several more times to make it
sink.
>> And you're saying the boat was actually
facing away from the United States when
those strikes happened.
>> That's apparently what the unedited
surveillance video shows. And there was
such controversy surrounding this thing
the US military had done that it wasn't
clear whether this was going to be a
one-off or they were going to keep
going. But then last week Trump
announced a second and then a third
strike on two more boats. Each time in
those cases he said
>> they had killed three people aboard each
of those vessels.
>> So we know it's not a one-off. It's now
something of a pattern.
That's right. And we actually know less
about them in some respects. In the
second attack, Trump said that it was
Venezuelans aboard. Didn't identify a
particular organization. Third attack,
he didn't even give a nationality for
who was aboard or identify a particular
cartel or gang he said was behind the
smuggling. We do know that they have
said each of these attacks so far has
taken place in international waters. And
the third attack took place off the
coast of the Dominican Republic. And
interestingly, the Dominican Republic
forces went out to the site of the
attack and over the weekend and have
said that they were able to recover some
floating bales of what appear to be
drugs and they released some photographs
of that and that's the first evidence we
have that there was in fact drugs on
board apparently at least one of these
vessels. The point is in each of these
cases, the Trump administration is not
giving us enough information to
independently assess really what
happened. If we are to take them at
their word for a moment that these were
drug traffickers smuggling a bunch of
drugs into the US,
can the US military just shoot boats
like this out of the water? Is that
allowed?
not under any traditional understanding
of how constraints both in domestic law
and international law and the use of
force works any more than a police
officer who sees someone he thinks is
dealing drugs on a street corner can
just pull out his gun and shoot the
person dead. Drug smuggling is a crime,
a serious crime, but it is dealt with as
a law enforcement measure. And for many
years, the way the United States and
other countries have dealt with the
problem of drug smuggling in the
Caribbean Sea and elsewhere is that the
US Coast Guard with assistance from the
US Navy interdicts these boats, boards
them, searches them. If it turns out the
suspicions are accurate, it seizes the
drugs and arrests the crew for
prosecution. And if it turns out the
suspicions are not accurate, it lets the
people go. doesn't kill them on
suspicion.
>> Well, how is the Trump administration
legally justifying this then? Like
within the general outlines of the
rationale that that you mentioned,
what's the legal basis that they're
using to say, you know, this is okay,
this is permissible. Traditionally, an
administration doing something this edgy
and novel would seek to justify itself
by putting out a long legal memo,
probably written by the Justice
Department's Office of Legal Counsel,
and you may or may not agree with it,
but at least you would have something to
talk about. You could sink your teeth
into it, and people could say, "Well,
this is where they're really pushing it,
and we disagree." But there would still
be something there. In this case, they
haven't really put out anything like
that. There's some straight comments and
a tur statement that the White House put
out a couple sentences of after people
like me pushed them to say something.
And so we we are sort of left to fill in
the blanks for them.
And their argument seems to hinge on the
idea that they can expand who counts as
a terrorist and expand what a government
can do to someone it is deemed a
terrorist.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
You said, Charlie, that the Trump
administration's justification for these
strikes hinges in part on the
administration defining drug traffickers
as terrorists.
Are they terrorists? Like what's the
definition of a terrorist?
>> So in everyday language, a terrorist
group is an organization that is using
violence to advance some kind of
ideological,
religious, political goal. They're
trying to coersse a government into
changing its policy. They're trying to
overturn a government and replace it
with something new. They're trying to
intimidate a population into changing
its attitude towards something. And
because that seems so insidious and sort
of different than ordinary crime, it is
treated differently by the law. And one
of the ways it's different is that
Congress has empowered the executive
branch to designate foreign
organizations
as terrorists organizations. And so the
precursor to this eruption of violence
in the Caribbean Sea is that several
months ago after the Trump 2
administration came into office, it
began designating drug cartels and Latin
American gangs as foreign terrorist
organizations. And that had never been
done before,
>> right?
>> Because these are not groups that are
motivated by religion or politics. They
are groups that are motivated by the
pursuit of illicit profit.
>> Right? I remember I was in Mexico at the
time as a foreign correspondent and this
was major news for the cartels in the
region. They were all trying to sus out
what this meant, what it meant that they
were now being compared to suicide
bombers.
>> Well, it's a major escalation. And these
are not what we think of as terrorists.
And they're not actually trying to kill
Americans with their products, even
though that clearly does happen,
especially with fentinol. They want
people to keep buying their product and
therefore they don't prefer to kill
them. That is not to say that these are
good people. These are obviously not
moral upstanding people who are making
positive contributions to human society,
>> right? And their motivation is also not
to change policy. It's not to change a
government. It's not ideological, but
Trump once he's declared them
terrorists, whether that fits the
traditional definition or not, can he
order them to be killed by the military
at that point?
>> No. And this is part of what is
fundamentally a disconnect here with the
extent to which the administration has
offered any kind of legal theory. They
had suggested that the act by the
executive branch of designating an
organization as a foreign terrorist
group brings with it legal authority to
attack that group militarily. And it's
just not true as a description of legal
reality.
>> Right?
>> That authority is limited to imposing
economic sanctions, freezing accounts,
making it a crime to provide material
support to such an organization. It does
not come with the authority to attack
them as if it were a war.
And I think it's worth pausing here to
recall since we've had 20 25 years of a
war on terror now what that really is,
which is that after 9/11, Congress
enacted a broad authorization for the
use of military force against
essentially al Qaeda in countries that
harbored al-Qaeda, which meant the
Taliban in Afghanistan. And that
therefore meant the United States was
engaged in an armed conflict with a
particular group of terrorists. Not all
terrorists everywhere in the world, but
al Qaeda. And in the years since then,
the war on al Qaeda has expanded as the
original al Qaeda has splintered and
morphed and moved around the world to
failed states like Somalia and rural
Yemen and groups like what we now call
the Islamic State. that use of military
force to target them for death has
continued because there is a
congressionally authorized war against
this particular group of terrorists. But
that doesn't mean that the executive
branch has open-ended authority to kill
people it deems any kind of terrorist
anywhere in the world it might find
them. It doesn't even mean that the the
executive branch could kill al-Qaeda
suspects in a place like Paris or London
where there's a police force that could
arrest them. There's constraints on the
use of armed force both as a matter of
domestic and international law that are
not overcome by the executive branch
saying we're going to designate this
group as a foreign terrorist
organization.
[Music]
Given that what we're seeing here off
the coast of Venezuela sounds pretty far
away from being legal.
>> I have been struck by how widespread
the alarm for what is happening is among
the various spectrum of people who pay
attention to the laws of armed conflict.
We've had 20 years of arguments over the
war on al-Qaeda and all of those people
from the left to the right, from the
dovish to the hawkish are agreed as far
as I can tell that this has crossed a
line. And it's not just something that
Trump is doing on his own, but he and
Pete Hexath are causing the troops,
American troops under their command to
cross this line themselves. So, does
this then get challenged? How does it
get challenged? Whose job is it to do
something about the illegality of these
strikes?
>> If these strikes are illegal, you know,
we don't have a court ruling that says
that. I'm just describing the
conversation outside the government.
>> Sure.
>> It's difficult to see a
forum where this gets cleanly
adjudicated. The most obvious place as a
matter of international law would be the
International Criminal Court in the
Hague, which notably right now is
prosecuting the former president of the
Philippines for crimes against humanity
and murder for his war on drugs, which
included gunning down people in the
street who were suspected of being drug
dealers. But the United States has not
joined the International Criminal Court.
And so there's probably not ever going
to be jurisdiction there. And the legal
experts I've spoken to all think it's
incredibly unlikely that domestically
soldiers would ever be prosecuted for
obeying the president's orders. And
thanks to the Supreme Court last year,
the president now of course has immunity
for his official actions. And so I don't
think there's going to be a lawsuit or a
prosecution anywhere that will give us a
definitive answer. So I think what we're
talking about more is just a political
reaction and just a thought of, you
know, what does this mean for the
soldiers under the command of these
people who are executing these orders to
say nothing of what does this mean for
people on boats in the Caribbean? Yeah,
you you're painting a very complicated
road to any potential accountability
here, but what about Congress? I mean,
they have the oversight role here. Can
they do anything?
>> Theoretically, yes. If there were
political will, and that's a huge
question right now, obviously under the
War Powers Resolution, which is a
Vietnam era law that gives Congress some
tools, it could, for example, vote on a
resolution directing the executive
branch to end its military operation.
And in fact, there is such legislation
being introduced right now by senators
Adam Schiff and Tim Kaine. You will
notice that they are both Democrats and
there is not a majority of Democrats in
either the House or the Senate right now
and Trump could veto such a resolution
directing him to end the operation. So
you would need twothirds majorities in
both chambers.
>> Not likely to happen. The flip side is
one of the things we learned last week
is that there is a slightly mysterious
draft bill that is circulating within
the executive branch and within Congress
that would authorize use of armed force
against groups that Trump deems to be
narotists. And it's interesting that
that's floating around and whether it
could in fact pass Congress to at least
legalize this as a matter of domestic
law is questionable in a period in which
there's a lot of fatigue over the
forever war open-ended war on terror.
>> Is this draft bill you're describing
basically an authorization for a war on
narot terror similar to the post 911 war
on on terror in the Middle East? Is that
what we're looking at
>> this bill? Yes. Yes. And you know, we're
so used to thinking about the war on
drugs going back to the 80s as this sort
of metaphor. And so, yes, this would be
a literal war on groups and people that
Trump deems to be narotists
and countries he deems to have harbored
or aided them. And so to the extent that
all this military hardware in the
Caribbean and the discussion of cartels
as terrorists also seems to be pointed
at Nicholas Maduro, the president of
Venezuela, who the Trump administration
very clearly would like to see not in
power.
>> Well, let's talk about Venezuela and
what the Maduro regime has to do with
all this. Because you hear the Trump
administration saying this is about
fighting drug trafficking, but Venezuela
is not a major source of fentinel coming
into the United States. So what's this
about? Why the focus on Venezuela right
now?
>> Yes, I think that is perhaps the most
important question in trying to make
sense of all this from the outside and
to to really start to peel it back. I
think we have to go back in time a
couple months before this military
operation started to really see how
focused Trump and people like Marco
Rubio around him are on Maduro and
Venezuela in particular. Mhm.
>> Right after Trump comes into power, your
listeners may remember there was a giant
controversy over the Alien Enemies Act,
an 18th century wartime deportation law
that allows the government to summarily
remove people who are citizens of a
country that we are at war with or that
is invading us. And Trump tried to, in
fact, successfully sent a couple plane
loads full of Venezuelans to this
notorious prison in El Salvador without
giving them due process hearings under a
claim that he could do so under this law
that had not been used since World War
II. But as part of that, Trump declared
in an official document that he signed
that this Venezuelan gang that he had
designated as terrorists, trend
dearagua,
was controlled by Maduro, was coming to
the United States and committing crimes
here at the direction of Maduro.
>> Is there any evidence of that, Charlie?
>> Right. So part of what's fascinating
about that is that it turns out that the
US government does not believe that's
true. That the intelligence community
actually has produced memos evaluating
the available evidence and thinks the
opposite is true. That this gang for one
thing is not organized enough to pass on
orders to anybody. It doesn't have a
sort of central hierarchy command and
control structure. But two, it's
actually at odds with Maduro and uh
Maduro forces are get into gunfights
with them. and so forth. And one of
those memos was eventually declassified.
And so we can see it. This is not just
source reporting.
>> And yet this is used as part of this
broader campaign targeting Maduro and
Venezuelans. The deportations in the US
and now these strikes you're saying?
>> Yes. Notwithstanding all that, Trump
continues to say this gang is, you know,
being controlled by Maduro, keeps
calling Maduro illegitimate and saying
justice is coming and the Justice
Department doubles a reward for his
capture. He was indicted in the first
Trump administration for drug
trafficking. And then they move all
these naval assets off the coast of
Venezuela. And these are not things that
you would really use to interdict or
even blow up little boats that you think
are carrying drugs. These are things
that carry cruise missiles and thousands
of Marines. You know, the obvious
question is, are they thinking about
something to remove Maduro from power in
Venezuela?
>> Meaning what? Meaning capture him,
meaning regime change,
>> right? So, we don't think they have
enough troops there to go in and take
over the country like a 1989 when the
Bush administration invaded Panama to
remove from power. But certainly, you
could see a capture operation or a
lethal operation. We don't really know
what we're looking at here, but it
certainly is a striking buildup of
force. It's a striking amount of
rhetoric, and now it's a striking use of
force under this narco terrorism rubric.
>> It seems from everything you've said
that what Trump is doing in ordering
these strikes on these boats off the
coast of Venezuela, it has a lot of
audiences and potential objectives. They
threaten the cartels on the one hand.
They threaten Maduro on the other. They
also send a message to all the people in
the United States who are affected by
drugs in one way or another, you know,
by overdoses that they are taking this
seriously. There's a way in which this
policy really has some benefits for the
Trump administration. I think absolutely
that you know drug traffickers suspected
drug traffickers are not at all a
popular victim and certainly Maduro
administration is not a group of people
that elicits much sympathy and to the
extent that this is like we're getting
tough with some visuals that play well
on television you can see the political
attraction of it but the details like
are these people on this particular boat
or that particular boat actually engaged
in drug smuggling. Does fentinol
actually come from South America are
also then standing alongside
moral and abstract rule of law issues?
Does Trump have the power to just
summarily kill people he says are
suspected drug smugglers? Is this
extrajudicial killings prohibited by
laws against murder? not even war crimes
because there is no armed conflict and
you need an armed conflict before you
can have a war crime. And it points also
to questions about what's coming next,
not just in the South Caribbean Sea, but
even closer to home because I mean this
is a time in which Trump has been
expanding his powers in all kinds of
ways. And one of those big categories is
his use of the military, not just what
we're talking about here in
international waters. He has sent troops
under federal control into the streets
of Los Angeles and Washington DC and by
all indications intends to do more of
that. And just this week claimed that he
was designating the Antifa movement as a
domestic terrorist organization even
though there is no law that allows the
designation of domestic groups as
terrorist organizations for first
amendment reasons. And even though
Antifa is not really an organization,
it's just a an idea or a stance or a
protest style. And so all kinds of lines
that seem like they exist. You don't use
troops inside the United States for
police functions. You can't designate a
domestic movement as a terrorist
organization are getting crossed. And so
what's the next line? What you're
pointing to is the fact that what Trump
has already been doing has pushed the
bounds of what's normal in terms of the
use of US military forces both abroad
and at home and that these strikes may
lead to another slippery slope on what
becomes permissible. Well, I I think the
very idea of what's permissible and
normal, to use your word, right now is
all open to question. This is an
administration that is unlike any we've
seen before, including the Trump one
administration. It is demonstrabably
feeling radically unconstrained by
limitations that previous presidents and
aids felt some need to adhere to.
And so we are 8 months into a situation
in which where all this is going remains
very much open to question.
Charlie, thank you so much for your
time.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Wednesday, a shooter opened fire on a
US Immigration and Customs Enforcement
facility in Dallas, killing one detainee
and critically wounding two others.
The gunman died of a self-inflicted
gunshot wound.
Officials said he left behind ammunition
bearing the phrase anti-ICE in blue
writing and that the attack had targeted
immigration enforcement agents. But
investigators didn't release many
details about the shooter or his
motives, and no law enforcement agents
were harmed in the attack.
Violence is wrong. Politically motivated
violence is wrong.
>> At a news conference after the shooting,
Texas Senator Ted Cruz called for an end
to acts of political violence. to every
politician
who is using rhetoric demonizing ICE and
demonizing CBP.
Stop
>> and cast blame on harsh rhetoric
attacking federal immigration agents.
>> Because here's what happens when
Democrats like Gavin Newsome did say
that these people are part of an
authoritarian government. when the
left-wing media.
>> Speaking at an event in North Carolina,
Vice President JD Vance accused
Democrats like California Governor Gavin
Nuome of encouraging violent acts
against ICE.
>> But if your political rhetoric
encourages violence against our law
enforcement, you can go straight to hell
and you have no place in the political
conversation of the United States of
America. On social media, President
Trump vowed to crack down on what he
called deranged radical leftists and
promised to sign an executive order to
dismantle these domestic terrorism
networks.
Today's episode was produced by Carlos
Prito and OliviaNat. It was edited by
Chris Hel and Paige Cowittat with help
from Devon Taylor and Patricia Willins.
fact checked by Susan Lee and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.